
“Without music, life would be a mistake.” ― Friedrich Nietzsche, Twilight of the Idols
“It is not a lack of love, but a lack of friendship that makes unhappy marriages.” 
“That which does not kill us makes us stronger.” 
“I'm not upset that you lied to me, I'm upset that from now on I can't believe you.” 
“And those who were seen dancing were thought to be insane by those who could not hear the music.” 
“It is hard enough to remember my opinions, without also remembering my reasons for them!” 
“Whoever fights monsters should see to it that in the process he does not become a monster. And if you gaze long enough into an abyss, the abyss will gaze back into you.” 
“There is always some madness in love. But there is also always some reason in madness.” 
“You must have chaos within you to give birth to a dancing star.” 
“You have your way. I have my way. As for the right way, the correct way, and the only way, it does not exist.” 
“Sometimes people don't want to hear the truth because they don't want their illusions destroyed.” 
“In heaven, all the interesting people are missing.” 
“He who has a why to live for can bear almost any how.” 
“There are no facts, only interpretations.” 
“The man of knowledge must be able not only to love his enemies but also to hate his friends.” 
“The individual has always had to struggle to keep from being overwhelmed by the tribe. If you try it, you will be lonely often, and sometimes frightened. But no price is too high to pay for the privilege of owning yourself.” 
“We should consider every day lost on which we have not danced at least once.” 
“When we are tired, we are attacked by ideas we conquered long ago.” 
“I cannot believe in a God who wants to be praised all the time.” 
“The snake which cannot cast its skin has to die. As well the minds which are prevented from changing their opinions; they cease to be mind.” 
“In individuals, insanity is rare; but in groups, parties, nations and epochs, it is the rule.” 
“No one can construct for you the bridge upon which precisely you must cross the stream of life, no one but you yourself alone.” 
“Is man merely a mistake of God's? Or God merely a mistake of man?” 
“The surest way to corrupt a youth is to instruct him to hold in higher esteem those who think alike than those who think differently.” 
“The advantage of a bad memory is that one enjoys repeatedly the same good things for the first time.” 
“Man is the cruelest animal.” 
“I am a forest, and a night of dark trees: but he who is not afraid of my darkness, will find banks full of roses under my cypresses.” 
“The thought of suicide is a great consolation: by means of it one gets through many a dark night.” 
“Every deep thinker is more afraid of being understood than of being misunderstood.” 
“Thoughts are the shadows of our feelings -- always darker, emptier and simpler.” 
