“A serious and good philosophical work could be written consisting entirely of jokes.”
“The limits of my language means the limits of my world.”
“I don't know why we are here, but I'm pretty sure that it is not in order to enjoy ourselves.”
“Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent.”
“Hell isn't other people. Hell is yourself.”
“The real question of life after death isn't whether or not it exists, but even if it does what problem this really solves.”
“Nothing is so difficult as not deceiving oneself.”
“I am my world.”
“If people never did silly things nothing intelligent would ever get done.”
“Only describe, don't explain.”
“A man will be imprisoned in a room with a door that's unlocked and opens inwards; as long as it does not occur to him to pull rather than push.”
“Death is not an event in life: we do not live to experience death. If we take eternity to mean not infinite temporal duration but timelessness, then eternal life belongs to those who live in the present. Our life has no end in the way in which our visual field has no limits.”
“If we take eternity to mean not infinite temporal duration but timelessness, then eternal life belongs to those who live in the present.”
“The problems are solved, not by giving new information, but by arranging what we have known since long.”
“Don't for heaven's sake, be afraid of talking nonsense! But you must pay attention to your nonsense.”
“I am sitting with a philosopher in the garden; he says again and again 'I know that that’s a tree', pointing to a tree that is near us. Someone else arrives and hears this, and I tell him: 'This fellow isn’t insane. We are only doing philosophy.”
“We are asleep. Our Life is a dream. But we wake up sometimes, just enough to know that we are dreaming.”
“Not how the world is, but that it is, is the mystery.”
“Philosophy is a battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of language.”
“Never stay up on the barren heights of cleverness, but come down into the green valleys of silliness.”
“How small a thought it takes to fill a life.”
“When we can't think for ourselves, we can always quote”
“If you and I are to live religious lives, it mustn't be that we talk a lot about religion, but that our manner of life is different. It is my belief that only if you try to be helpful to other people will you in the end find your way to God.”
“We feel that even if all possible scientific questions be answered, the problems of life have still not been touched at all.”
“To imagine a language is to imagine a form of life.”
“I act with complete certainty. But this certainty is my own.”
“If anyone is unwilling to descend into himself, because this is too painful, he will remain superficial in his writing. . . If I perform to myself, then it’s this that the style expresses. And then the style cannot be my own. If you are unwilling to know what you are, your writing is a form of deceit.”
“At the core of all well-founded belief lies belief that is unfounded.”
“What can be shown, cannot be said.”
“Ethics and aesthetics are one.”
“For an answer which cannot be expressed the question too cannot be expressed.
The riddle does not exist.
If a question can be put at all, then it can also be answered.”
“Language disguises thought.”
“What is troubling us is the tendency to believe that the mind is like a little man within.”
“The world of the happy man is a different one from that of the unhappy man.”
“Tell me," Wittgenstein's asked a friend, "why do people always say, it was natural for man to assume that the sun went round the earth rather than that the earth was rotating?" His friend replied, "Well, obviously because it just looks as though the Sun is going round the Earth." Wittgenstein replied, "Well, what would it have looked like if it had looked as though the Earth was rotating?”
“I give no sources, because it is indifferent to me whether what I have thought has already beenthought before me by another.”
“A picture held us captive. And we could not get outside it, for it lay in our language and language seemed to repeat it to us inexorably.”
“Tell them I've had a wonderful life.”
“Language disguises the thought; so that from the external form of the clothes one cannot infer the form of the thought they clothe, because the external form of the clothes is constructed with quite another object than to let the form of the body be recognized.”
“When you are philosophizing you have to descend into primeval chaos and feel at home there.”
“You can't think decently if you're not willing to hurt yourself”
“Don't think, but look! (PI 66)”
“If you tried to doubt everything you would not get as far as doubting anything. The game of doubting itself presupposes certainty.”
“The mystical is not how the world is, but that it is.”
“An honest religious thinker is like a tightrope walker. He almost looks as though he were walking on nothing but air. His support is the slenderest imaginable. And yet it really is possible to walk on it.”
“Sometimes, in doing philosophy, one just wants to utter an inarticulate sound.”
“If in life we are surrounded by death, then in the health of our intellect we are surrounded by madness.”
“Logic takes care of itself; all we have to do is to look and see how it does it.”
“This is how philosophers should salute each other: ‘Take your time.”
“Philosophers are often like little children, who first scribble random lines on a piece of paper with their pencils, and now ask an adult 'What is that?”
“My day passes between logic, whistling, going for walks, and being depressed. I wish to God that I were more intelligent and everything would finally become clear to me - or else that I needn’t live much longer.”
“The eternal life is given to those who live in the present.”
“Wovon man nicht sprechen kann, darüber muß man schweigen.”
“Just improve yourself; that is the only thing you can do to better the world.”
“Everything that can be thought at all can be thought clearly. Everything that can be said can be said clearly.”
“One often makes a remark and only later sees how true it is. ”
“That it doesn’t strike us at all when we look around us, move about in space, feel our own bodies, etc. etc., shows how natural these things are to us. We do not notice that we see space perspectivally or that our visual field is in some sense blurred towards the edges. It doesn’t strike us and never can strike us because it is the way we perceive. We never give it a thought and it’s impossible we should, since there is nothing that contrasts with the form of our world.What I wanted to say is it’s strange that those who ascribe reality only to things and not to our ideas move about so unquestioningly in the world as idea and never long to escape from it.”
“The philosopher is not a citizen of any community of ideas, that is what makes him a philosopher.”
