Judith Butler has been instrumental in challenging hetero-normative paradigms of sex, sexuality and gender.
Butler believes that not only gender but sex itself is better understood as a sociological construct than as an objective biological reality. For sex, too, is always approached through a gendered lens, Butler says, so that even the preoccupations of those who purport to place the concept under a neutral scientific microscope are bound, however unconsciously, to a broader societal system that blandly polarises 'the male' and the 'the female', imposing upon each category all kinds of knee-jerk assumptions.
Heavily influenced by the French sociologist and philosopher Michel Foucault, Butler is highly sensitive to the role that the hypostasization of language plays in upholding the violences of Power. In this sense, she has doubtless contributed to the increasingly pervasive awareness of the possible connotations of assumed gendered pronouns.
Butler prefers to be referred to as 'they', explaining that she never felt comfortable with the designation 'she'.
Butler, like many post-structuralist philosophers, understands the power of subversion in overturning ossified notions of sex and sexual identity. By co-opting roles formerly associated with 'butch hetero-masculinity' and deliberately exaggerating the features associated with them, queer culture, for instance, has brilliantly underlined the fundamentally constructed nature of ALL rigid sexual identities, which are ultimately borne out of a similar unconscious sort of theatre.
'Performativity' is the term Butler employs to describe the manner in which we gradually come to conceive of ourselves as a single, fixed gendered identity through repeated mimicry of, and cooperation with, the broader social system in which we exist. Again, this generally occurs unconsciously - through the implicit messages found as much in the speech acts of those closest to us as in the imagery of looming billboards.
Butler is firmly rooted in the Continental philosophical tradition, which is ordinarily contrasted with the analytic tradition in Western philosophy. Unlike analytic philosophers, Continental thinkers tend to be more engaged with humanities-based subjects and less adherent to the strictures formal logic. They are more likely, moreover, to aver Hume's idea that philosophy ought to play handmaiden to empirical science, clearing technical semantic other confusions that might ultimately obstruct the progress of the latter.
